# Hot Reloading ("Live" Development)

Note that hot reloading has not been refactored in quite a while and is not
guaranteed to work at this time.

### Summary

When developing in debug-builds with the nightly toolchain, Tuwunel is modular
using dynamic libraries and various parts of the application are hot-reloadable
while the server is running: http api handlers, admin commands, services,
database, etc. These are all split up into individual workspace crates as seen
in the `src/` directory. Changes to sourcecode in a crate rebuild that crate and
subsequent crates depending on it. Reloading then occurs for the changed crates.

Release builds still produce static binaries which are unaffected. Rust's
soundness guarantees are in full force. Thus you cannot hot-reload release
binaries.

### Requirements

Currently, this development setup only works on x86_64 and aarch64 Linux glibc.
[musl explicitly does not support hot reloadable libraries, and does not
implement `dlclose`][2]. macOS does not fully support our usage of `RTLD_GLOBAL`
possibly due to some thread-local issues. [This Rust issue][3] may be of
relevance, specifically [this comment][4]. It may be possible to get it working
on only very modern macOS versions such as at least Sonoma, as currently loading
dylibs is supported, but not unloading them in our setup, and the cited comment
mentions an Apple WWDC confirming there have been TLS changes to somewhat make
this possible.

As mentioned above this requires the nightly toolchain. This is due to reliance
on various Cargo.toml features that are only available on nightly, most
specifically `RUSTFLAGS` in Cargo.toml. Some of the implementation could also be
simpler based on other various nightly features. We hope lots of nightly
features start making it out of nightly sooner as there have been dozens of very
helpful features that have been stuck in nightly ("unstable") for at least 5+
years that would make this simpler. We encourage greater community consensus to
move these features into stability.

This currently only works on x86_64/aarch64 Linux with a glibc C library. musl C
library, macOS, and likely other host architectures are not supported (if other
architectures work, feel free to let us know and/or make a PR updating this).
This should work on GNU ld and lld (rust-lld) and gcc/clang, however if you
happen to have linker issues it's recommended to try using `mold` or `gold`
linkers, and please let us know in the [Tuwunel Matrix room][7] the linker
error and what linker solved this issue so we can figure out a solution. Ideally
there should be minimal friction to using this, and in the future a build script
(`build.rs`) may be suitable to making this easier to use if the capabilities
allow us.

### Usage

As of 19 May 2024, the instructions for using this are:

0. Have patience. Don't hesitate to join the [Tuwunel Matrix room][7] to
   receive help using this. As indicated by the various rustflags used and some
of the interesting issues linked at the bottom, this is definitely not something
the Rust ecosystem or toolchain is used to doing.

1. Install the nightly toolchain using rustup. You may need to use `rustup
   override set nightly` in your local Tuwunel directory, or use `cargo
+nightly` for all actions.

2. Uncomment `cargo-features` at the top level / root Cargo.toml

3. Scroll down to the `# Developer profile` section and uncomment ALL the
   rustflags for each dev profile and their respective packages.

4. In each workspace crate's Cargo.toml (everything under `src/*` AND
   `deps/rust-rocksdb/Cargo.toml`), uncomment the `dylib` crate type under
`[lib]`.

5. Due to [this rpath issue][5], you must export the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
   environment variable to your nightly Rust toolchain library directory. If
using rustup (hopefully), use this: `export
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:$HOME/.rustup/toolchains/nightly-x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/lib/`

6. Start the server. You can use `cargo +nightly run` for this along with the
   standard.

7. Make some changes where you need to.

8. In a separate terminal window in the same directory (or using a terminal
   multiplexer like tmux), run the *build* Cargo command `cargo +nightly build`.
   Cargo should only rebuild what was changed / what's necessary, so it should
   not be rebuilding all the crates.

9. In your Tuwunel server terminal, hit/send `CTRL+C` signal. This will tell
   Tuwunel to find which libraries need to be reloaded, and reloads them as
   necessary.

10. If there were no errors, it will tell you it successfully reloaded `#`
   modules, and your changes should now be visible. Repeat 7 - 9 as needed.

To shutdown Tuwunel in this setup, hit/send `CTRL+\`. Normal builds still
shutdown with `CTRL+C` as usual.

Steps 1 - 5 are the initial first-time steps for using this. To remove the hot
reload setup, revert/comment all the Cargo.toml changes.

As mentioned in the requirements section, if you happen to have some linker
issues, try using the `-fuse-ld=` rustflag and specify mold or gold in all the
`rustflags` definitions in the top level Cargo.toml, and please let us know in
the [Tuwunel Matrix room][7] the problem. mold can be installed typically
through your distro, and gold is provided by the binutils package.

It's possible a helper script can be made to do all of this, or most preferably
a specially made build script (build.rs). `cargo watch` support will be
implemented soon which will eliminate the need to manually run `cargo build` all
together.

### Addendum

Conduit was inherited as a single crate without modularity or reloading in its
design. Reasonable partitioning and abstraction allowed a split into several
crates, though many circular dependencies had to be corrected. The resulting
crates now form a directed graph as depicted in figures below. The interfacing
between these crates is still extremely broad which is not mitigable.

Initially [hot_lib_reload][6] was investigated but found appropriate for a
project designed with modularity through limited interfaces, not a large and
complex existing codebase. Instead a bespoke solution built directly on
[libloading][8] satisfied our constraints. This required relatively minimal
modifications and zero maintenance burden compared to what would be required
otherwise. The technical difference lies with relocation processing: we leverage
global bindings (`RTLD_GLOBAL`) in a very intentional way. Most libraries and
off-the-shelf module systems (such as [hot_lib_reload][6]) restrict themselves
to local bindings (`RTLD_LOCAL`). This allows them to release software to
multiple platforms with much greater consistency, but at the cost of burdening
applications to explicitly manage these bindings. In our case with an optional
feature for developers, we shrug any such requirement to enjoy the cost/benefit
on platforms where global relocations are properly cooperative.

To make use of `RTLD_GLOBAL` the application has to be oriented as a directed
acyclic graph. The primary rule is simple and illustrated in the figure below:
**no crate is allowed to call a function or use a variable from a crate below
it.**

![Tuwunel's dynamic library setup diagram - created by Jason
Volk](assets/libraries.png)

When a symbol is referenced between crates they become bound: **crates cannot be
unloaded until their calling crates are first unloaded.** Thus we start the
reloading process from the crate which has no callers. There is a small problem
though: the first crate is called by the base executable itself! This is solved
by using an `RTLD_LOCAL` binding for just one link between the main executable
and the first crate, freeing the executable from all modules as no global
binding ever occurs between them.

![Tuwunel's reload and load order diagram - created by Jason
Volk](assets/reload_order.png)

Proper resource management is essential for reliable reloading to occur. This is
a very basic ask in RAII-idiomatic Rust and the exposure to reloading hazards is
remarkably low, generally stemming from poor patterns and practices.
Unfortunately static analysis doesn't enforce reload-safety programmatically
(though it could one day), for now hazards can be avoided by knowing a few basic
do's and dont's:

1. Understand that code is memory. Just like one is forbidden from referencing
   free'd memory, one must not transfer control to free'd code. Exposure to this
is primarily from two things:

    - Callbacks, which this project makes very little use of.
    - Async tasks, which are addressed below.

2. Tie all resources to a scope or object lifetime with greatest possible
symmetry (locality). For our purposes this applies to code resources, which
means async blocks and tokio tasks.

    - **Never spawn a task without receiving and storing its JoinHandle**.
    - **Always wait on join handles** before leaving a scope or in another cleanup
    function called by an owning scope.

3. Know any minor specific quirks documented in code or here:

    - Don't use `tokio::spawn`, instead use our `Handle` in `core/server.rs`, which
    is reachable in most of the codebase via `services()` or other state. This is
    due to some bugs or assumptions made in tokio, as it happens in `unsafe {}`
    blocks, which are mitigated by circumventing some thread-local variables. Using
    runtime handles is good practice in any case.

The initial implementation PR is available [here][1].

### Interesting related issues/bugs

- [DT_RUNPATH produced in binary with rpath = true is wrong (cargo)][5]
- [Disabling MIR Optimization in Rust Compilation
(cargo)](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/disabling-mir-optimization-in-rust-compilation/19066/5)
- [Workspace-level metadata
(cargo-deb)](https://github.com/kornelski/cargo-deb/issues/68)

[1]: https://github.com/girlbossceo/conduwuit/pull/387
[2]: https://wiki.musl-libc.org/functional-differences-from-glibc.html#Unloading-libraries
[3]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/28794
[4]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/28794#issuecomment-368693049
[5]: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/12746
[6]: https://crates.io/crates/hot-lib-reloader/
[7]: https://matrix.to/#/#tuwunel:tuwunel.chat
[8]: https://crates.io/crates/libloading
